Hey there, it's Rachel. I want to take a
quick second to tell you about a fun
little project that we're working on
here at the Daily. It's something that
we'll share later on as a bonus episode
for New York Times subscribers. And the
idea is really simple. We want to talk
to our fascinating, incredible
colleagues here at the New York Times
about who they are and how they do their
jobs. And as part of that, we want to
take questions from you, our listeners.
We're going to start with games. Wordle
connections, the crossword, the things
so many of us do every single day. We're
starting with the actual people who
actually make those games. So, what are
your questions? Do you want to know what
the Wordle editor thinks of your
starting word? Do you want to know how
they come up with a new game? Do you
want to know if they ever cheat?
Whatever your question is, you can send
it to us by recording a voice memo and
emailing it to daily subscribers@ny
times.com.
Okay, here's the show.
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
The Supreme Court has cleared the way
for President Trump to remake American
government, siding with the president
over and over again. But many of these
rulings lack something fundamental, an
explanation for why the most important
judges in the country came to their
decision.
Today, my colleague Adam Liptac explains
why the rise of the so-called shadow
docket has shown confusion and in some
cases frustration in courts around the
country.
It's Monday, September 15th.
[Music]
Adam, I think that when most people
think of the Supreme Court, they imagine
oral arguments and lawyers standing in
front of justices making impassioned
cases for their clients and then the
justices asking questions and writing
these lengthy opinions and dissents. But
you recently wrote about how there's
been this flurry of cases recently that
are kind of the exact opposite of
everything I just described, which felt
a little bit surprising. And I wondered
if you could just start off by telling
us what has been going on at the Supreme
Court lately.
>> So the Supreme Court is operating these
days on two tracks. One of those tracks,
the one you refer to, Rachel, is the
merits docket. On the merits docket,
people ask the Supreme Court to hear a
case. If it does, it hears oral
arguments. The justices meet, vote,
deliberate, exchange drafts.
>> Right? And about 60 times a year they
issue long involved considered
decisions, majority opinions, dissenting
opinions, often a 100 pages or more. And
that's what we're used to. Now, at the
same time,
on a separate track,
there's the so-called, and people use
different names for this, there's the
shadow docket or the emergency docket,
or lately some justices have been
calling it the interim docket. Hm.
>> But the short of it is is that this
happens really fast. Parties race to the
court. They submit only very thin
briefs. There's no oral argument. And in
a matter of weeks, the court issues
orders deciding consequential matters in
a way that will last a year or two in a
very tur opinion. And this different
procedure has really accelerated in the
second Trump administration, which has
run to the court maybe 24 times already
in its first seven or eight months in
office. That's a larger number than the
Biden administration did over four
years. It's a much larger number than
the Obama and George W. Bush
administrations combined. So order of
magnitude, we're in a different area.
>> Wow.
And also the subject matter of these
applications is really consequential and
the court has greenlighted immigration
stops in LA, cancelling NIH grants,
firing thousands of federal workers,
discharging transgender service members.
It's essentially the entire Trump
agenda. Okay, that helps me understand
why something that I don't think I've
really heard about before this week,
suddenly it feels as though I'm hearing
about it everywhere. So, can you just
explain what is this? How does it work?
>> So, here's how these cases typically
arise. A president, say President Trump,
issues an executive order setting out
some bold piece of his agenda, some
program that gets challenged in court
and a federal district court judge says,
"I don't know yet. I haven't had a
chance to look at all the evidence. I
don't know yet whether it's lawful or
not, but I'm going to maintain the
status quo." And the status quo is we
didn't have this program yesterday.
Let's not have it today either. and I'm
going to block this program for now
while the case goes forward because I
think it might not be lawful. The
administration doesn't like that answer
and they'll go to an appeals court and
say would you pause this ruling because
we think this ruling is wrong. The
appeals court might well say no it's
it's okay with us. Then within days it
goes to the Supreme Court and the
Supreme Court is asked to pause that
ruling blocking the initiative not to
rule on its ultimate lawfulness just to
say whether it can be in place or not.
And the court does that very fast
generally without in-person deliberation
among the justices. kind of shooting
from the hip and importantly issues
orders that contain either very little
reasoning, a paragraph or two, or quite
often no reasoning at all. It just says
yay or nay, and you don't know why.
>> So, it basically sounds like this is a
process that allows decisions to both
get expedited and also does not provide
a lot of transparency into why they are
made. Why has this procedure become more
popular recently? I mean the basic
answer is that presidents of both
parties have been increasingly
aggressive in trying to do stuff by
executive order and that gives rise kind
of as night follows day to court
challenges to court rulings
>> to initiatives being blocked and the
Supreme Court being asked to weigh in on
really short notice. And I should say
that this acceleration, this uptake has
exploded in the second Trump
administration. And the administration
thought that the Supreme Court will
generally be sympathetic to them either
because it's a 63 Republican appointee
majority that might be inclined to be
sympathetic to a Republican president or
a court that in general defers to
executive power of presidents of either
party. But the Trump administration has
gone to the Supreme Court over and over
again in the knowledge that they are
quite likely to succeed and they have
been. So what it sounds like is that the
Trump administration has basically
figured out that this is an effective
strategy to execute their agenda quickly
and they have been proven right in the
many decisions that we've seen handed
down so far this year. But I feel like a
lot of people listening might be
thinking like, "Wait a minute, don't the
Supreme Court justices typically vote
along party lines?" There's a reason we
call them conservatives or liberal
justices, right?
>> There is an element of politics in
Supreme Court judging, but in argued
cases on the so-called merits docket,
they're unanimous like 40% of the time.
>> The number of cases that break strictly
along the 63 line is like a large
handful. and unusual alliances and weird
permutations and strange bedfellows are
not uncommon on the merit stocket.
>> So like in the normal course of business
you do see more agreement among the
conservative and the liberal justices.
>> Yes. But when we looked recently at just
these emergency applications in the last
two administrations,
the picture is quite different. There's
a lot more partisan voting. There are
essentially no strange bedfellows. The
Biden administration did win a slight
majority of its emergency applications,
about 53%.
The Trump administration far more
successful at 84%. But I don't think
those are the most interesting numbers.
The most interesting numbers are when
you look at the voting records of
individual justices
and the right side of the court and the
left side of the court are both
completely playing to type. So, Justice
Alo may well be the most conservative
member of the court. Voted for President
Trump 95% of the time
>> and President Biden 18% of the time.
That is a 77 percentage point gap. I did
that math because when you look at
justices Sotomayor and Katanji Brown
Jackson, probably the two most liberal
members of the court, they also have a
77 percentage point gap, but going in
the other direction. Now, this is not
completely apples to apples. They're not
the same cases. They're different legal
issues, but in a sense, not. In a sense,
it's the same fundamental legal issue.
How much difference do you give the
president? And how do you calculate
whether leaving a program in place
causes harm to one side or the other?
That's the basic question in all of
these emergency applications. And the
justices I just mentioned come to very
different conclusions,
if not based on, at least correlated to
the president who they might be thought
to like or dislike. Why do you think we
see so much more partisanship in these
emergency decisions?
>> I think the justices themselves will say
they don't do their best work on short
notice. That long consideration of
briefs and arguments and deliberations
helps them understand the issues, find
consensus,
>> find common ground.
>> Find common ground. Find ways to rule
maybe more narrowly but with a greater
majority. when you're operating at this
speed, things other than than the law
may take a greater role.
>> Now, the justices will say, "Well,
that's why we don't write anything
because we don't want to be locked in
because we haven't thought it through
completely because we're being required
to give a quick answer and we will defer
to another day the chance to give a more
considered answer." And they say that if
you were to write something now, you'd
be locked in. and it would be harder for
you to come to a different conclusion
later.
But the rise of this procedure, the rise
of emergency orders has real
consequences for the work of the Supreme
Court and is causing some real chaos in
the legal system itself.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Adam, I can imagine why these kinds of
decisions might be sort of confusing
because these orders, as you explained,
are issued really, really quickly and
the Supreme Court isn't explaining
itself in great detail. So, I wonder if
you could give an example of a case that
would allow us to see kind of how that
lack of explanation leads to this
confusion in real time.
Well, just recently there was a
challenge to the immigration crackdown
in the Los Angeles area where, as you
know, ICE agents were stopping detaining
lots of people and challengers said that
violated the Fourth Amendment. They said
it was indiscriminate racial profiling.
and they persuaded a federal trial judge
to issue an injunction that says we're
not saying you can't enforce the
immigration laws, but saying you can't
rely on certain factors alone or in
combination. And those factors were
someone's apparent ethnicity. You can't
stop somebody just for looking Hispanic.
Whether they speak Spanish or accented
English, whether they're at a work site
that you might associate with
unauthorized immigrants, or the type of
work people do, say landscaping or
construction.
>> Mhm.
>> And the Trump administration didn't like
those restrictions. They go to the
appeals court, the Ninth Circuit. The
Ninth Circuit won't pause it. And they
go to the Supreme Court. And the Supreme
Court rules for the administration in a
decision that contains precisely zero
reasoning.
>> Like nothing. They didn't explain any
part of the decision.
>> Yeah. We don't know whether it was
because the parties challenging the
order didn't have standing or whether
the lower courts had ruled too broadly
on immigration enforcement tactics. The
majority gave no reasons. All we know is
the Supreme Court orders that in Los
Angeles at least ICE agents are free to
use these tactics to pick people up at
least for now. Does it apply elsewhere?
We just don't know.
So in other words, and I think this gets
at the confusion that you were talking
about earlier, if you are, for example,
a judge in Chicago and you're dealing
with this exact same type of issue,
whether or not law enforcement can
racially profile, you don't know how the
Supreme Court made its decision. So
therefore, you don't understand what the
actual precedent is, and you are just
basically guessing about whether or not
your decision is an appropriate
application of the Supreme Court's
precedent.
Right. I mean, one thing in this case in
particular was that the trial judge's
ruling looked at four factors and said
that you can't alone or in combination
relying on only those factors stop
somebody. Well, that raises a ton of
questions and the next judge may wonder,
well, what about two or three of those
factors? Or what about apparent
ethnicity by itself? An ordinary merits
decision would methodically work through
these issues and give litigants and
judges real guidance about what the law
is. Now, we haven't yet seen real life
examples of lower courts grappling with
the quite recent decision on immigration
stops in LA. But in other cases
involving federal grants and whether the
president can fire the leaders of
independent agencies, whether he can
deport people to South Sudan, those
cases have caused actual judges to be
actually confused.
Justice Neil Gorsuch actually last month
in a case involving NIH grants said that
a federal judge in Boston had ignored
the reasoning of a four paragraph order
in April in a different case and that he
should have understood that even though
that wasn't a ruling on the merits and
whether as Justice Gorsuch said it was
only probabilistic
that it still had presidential force.
divorce and that judge had done
something gravely wrong and that gave
the judge William Young of the Federal
District Court in Boston a real I don't
know what to call it. He actually went
into a court hearing and at length
apologized and said he didn't realize he
had not meant to defy the Supreme Court.
>> Oh wow.
>> That he was a Reagan appointee. He said
in his 40ome years on the bench, he's
never tried to defy a higher court
ruling. He is committed to president.
>> He's like, I'm not a troublemaker.
>> He just didn't know.
And this is not an isolated incident.
Lots of judges are really struggling to
figure out what kind of precedent a
shadow docket ruling represents. The
problem we have is the Supreme Court
isn't giving us opinions, is giving us
signals.
>> Just last week,
>> federal appeals court judges in Virginia
debated this in open court.
>> The Supreme Court's action must mean
something. It doesn't do these things
just for the kicks of it. And we can't
just blow past it. And you can hear them
weighing how on the one hand these
orders are quite opaque.
>> But I I mean I have to say I kind of
read the Supreme Court as telling us we
are the ultimate deciders of the interim
status of a case. How how do we get
around that here?
>> On the other hand, they have an
obligation to follow Supreme Court
president if they can figure out what
that precedent is.
>> But they're telling us nothing. And so
you had one judge really bristling at
the Supreme Court for putting them in
this position, for giving them so little
detail, so little guidance.
>> Yes, we're out here flailing. We're
We're just in the water, thrown in the
water. Just give us some guidance.
>> Yeah, I no disagreement there. And and I
guess
>> Adam, I think one of the previous recent
times we've had you on the show was to
discuss this growing tension between the
lower courts and the Supreme Courts. And
this feels like a really clear example
of how that tension is playing out in
the open,
>> right? And in general, that is not the
way the federal judicial system usually
works. There's great respect and
admiration across the levels of the
judicial system and people know their
roles and this controversy, dispute,
schism, and out in the open is really
unusual.
I guess one thing I'm wondering is it's
clear why what you have outlined could
be frustrating to a judge, but why
should an average person care that this
is going on?
>> Well, if judges are confused, the people
affected by these decisions are
confused. And that's not a handful of
people. That's thousands, maybe tens of
thousands of federal workers. It's many
hundreds of thousands of immigrants.
These are decisions that are not
abstractions. They are real life
lifealtering decisions from the court.
>> Given all of the confusion that this is
causing for people and for the lower
courts, I just want to ask is this the
only mechanism by which these cases can
be decided? Like do they really have to
be decided this quickly just because the
government asks for them to be decided
on this emergency basis?
>> There is another way and the court has
done this occasionally.
Instead of issuing an order based only
on these thin stay application briefs,
it could set the case down for argument.
It could call for more briefs. It could
do that pretty quickly and maybe the
answer is in these hard cases, rather
than moving at lightning speed, slow it
down a little bit and give a more
conclusive answer after briefing,
argument, deliberation.
>> The short answer is no. It does not have
to be this way. There could actually be
an in between option.
>> Yes. But what's more common is that
these same cases in which the court has
temporarily greenlighted programs will
come back to the court in due course in
a year on the merits and they'll set it
down for real arguments and they won't
necessarily go the same way. In the
Biden years, there were three instances
where the court refused to lift
injunctions blocking Biden programs, but
ultimately ruled in favor of Biden. In
the Trump scenario, it may be that when
cases return to the court, Trump loses,
but in the meantime, things will have
happened. If the court greenlights
lifting immigration protections for
hundreds of thousands of people, some of
those people will have been deported.
>> If the court greenlights firing
thousands of federal workers, maybe
someday they'll go, you know what, you
shouldn't have fired them.
>> But they got fired nonetheless. They got
deported nonetheless.
>> Right? So you can call these interim
orders, provisional orders, temporary
orders, but they have real world
immediate consequences that can't
necessarily be undone.
I wonder how you think we should
understand the moment that the court is
now in in terms of whether what we are
seeing represents a fundamentally
different Supreme Court or a phase of
the Supreme Court.
>> I think this could be a new normal
with the court which has for centuries
operated in great deliberation. There
are scattered around the Supreme Court
grounds little sculptures of tortoises.
And that's a representation from the
court that what they do is slow and
deliberate and considered and not moving
at lightning speed.
>> But these days, seemingly half of the
court's efforts are devoted to this kind
of speedy unexplained work. And remember
that we have three branches of
government. Two of them are elected.
They claim legitimacy by dent of having
been elected by the public.
The Supreme Court, the justices are
obviously unelected
and they claim legitimacy and authority
by dent of reason, by dent of explaining
themselves and persuading people that
the issue before them has gotten their
full attention and a careful opinion
that you may not agree with, but at
least you can follow. At least you can
engage with it. At least you can sort of
test where it's right or wrong.
In a court that just says like a parent
would say to a child, why? Because I
said so. That is a different version of
the American justice system than the one
we've been used to. And it has the
potential to reshape not only the
Supreme Court, but American justice.
[Music]
Adam, thank you so much.
>> Thank you, Rachel.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
Governor Spencer Cox of Utah provided
new information about the background and
political leanings of the 22-year-old
accused of killing Charlie Kirk, saying
that the suspect had quote leftist
ideology and that he had been in a
romantic relationship with someone who
was in the process of transitioning from
male to female. I will say that that
person has been very cooperative with
authorities. What we have learned
specifically is that this person did not
have any knowledge, was shocked uh when
they uh when they found out about it. Um
Cox said on NBC's Meet the Press that
the romantic partner, who lived with the
suspect, had provided investigators with
private messages that incriminated the
alleged gunman. Cox also said that the
suspect appeared to have been quote
radicalized sometime after dropping out
of college and that the man had spent
much of his time immersed in online
gaming message boards and part of what
Cox called the quote deep dark internet.
And in a live stream from the set of
Kirk's podcast, his wife Erica spoke for
the first time publicly since the
assassination, vowing that her husband's
work would continue. If you thought that
my husband's mission was powerful
before,
you have no idea.
You have no idea what you just have
unleashed across this entire country and
this world. You have no idea.
Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson, Ricky Netsky, and Michael Simon
Johnson. It was edited by Rob Zipco,
Lexi Dio, and Devon Taylor. and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]